[Music]
welcome to the session on command line
editors
in this session we will work with text
files when we have situations like
we have logged into a supercomputer
or a remote computer
with the poor bandwidth we often have
a requirement to be able to
edit some files
for submitting our
job for execution
and within a terminal to be able to do
that editing
is going to be very convenient
because
often the file transfer will also take
more than one hop
to go into a system such as well within
the network of
an organization where such facilities
are made available to you so the ability
to use a command line editor is going to
be important for you to make the best
use of such an environment so when it
comes to editors we have various classes
of editors so we have got this so called
line editors that is editors which work
in a terminal environment
and help you edit one line at a time
and the old editors such as the ed ed or
ex the x editor
which is slightly improved version of
the add editor these come from the days
of unix
and they are almost always there for any
flavor of unix or linux and terminal
editors
which are visual in nature
are more popular because of the
experience of the user in editing the
file there is an editor which came along
with a popular email application called
pine
which is called pico and
it could also be
launched as a standalone editor
and additional features were added to
this editor and it is now called as a
nano editor
it is one of the most popular simple
and yet very user friendly
text editor within the terminal
environment that we can find today
the va editor is perhaps the most
popular
and also the most complex
editor for the terminal environment
and emacs is an alternative to the va
editor
one normally
says that among programmers there are
two kinds
the ones who are fanatical about va
editor
and the rest who are fanatical about
emacs
very rare to find someone who likes both
and as for me
i am a va editor fan
there are graphical user interface
editors also available
and these are different for different
user interfaces such as the kde
environment would have k or k write
which are like the notepad of windows
operating system and in the gnome
environment
it is a g edit
which would provide you a gui editor for
pure text files
and there are editors which
open a window in the
gui environment and allow you to edit
files with lot of features
and for programmers these are quite
popular
tools such as sublime or atom atom
editor is quite popular among the github
users
and then
an editor called brackets which is also
popular among those who write html code
and there are so called the integrated
development environments which come with
an editor compiler debugger and so on
and we have the popular ides on linux
such as eclipse bluefish or netbeans
from apache
so while you have a very wide range of
editors that are there
it is very useful for us to know one or
two editors that would work without
any additional installation that is
required
and in that sense va editor and nano
editor would fit the bill because
these come
automatically bundled with every linux
operated system
what are the kind of features that you
must keep in mind while selecting an
editor
you must be able to scroll through the
file you must be able to change the way
you view the file
that is page by page to be able to look
at
different portions of the text file that
you are editing you should also be able
to see where are you in the current
position
which line number you are within the
file and so on
navigating within that
text file
either character by character or word by
word or line by line
or
by matching a pattern using regular
expressions would be very useful when
you are looking for a particular keyword
that you would like to change and
perform some code editing
the requirement to insert text replace
some text or delete some text is a very
common requirement for all of us cut
copy paste is also required for us
because we are going to move text around
within our files we should be able to
search and replace a portion of the text
either in the entire
text file or in a portion of the text
file it would be good if the editor is
language aware so that it can provide us
a syntax highlighting so that
minus syntactical errors can be avoided
while we
write the code in the editor itself
and added benefits would be when we are
able to do some key mapping so that
certain combinations of keys can perform
slightly elaborate operations within the
editor
and if the editor can start with the
init script where such key mappings
could be made available then that would
be good and if you are able to record a
macro and play it so that we perform
some repetitive actions on multiple text
files that also would be an added
benefit
and the capabilities of the editor can
be extended by plugins and so those
editors that support the concept of
plugins would also be a good choice
and as you could expect
both ebi editor as well as the emacs
editor would
satisfy all these requirements
so we will actually start off learning
how to edit line by line using the add
editor
i don't think you will actually be using
it in your daily life but
the commands that you will be learning
through this will be used as part of va
editor and therefore it is worth seeing
from where these commands have
originated
and also in an emergency situation where
there is absolutely no editor then add
will always be there with every unix or
linux variant
and therefore you still at least know
how to go about editing some files if
other tools are not available here is a
list of features for the
add editor which is same as for the x
editor
except for the x editor is slightly more
user friendly so
by default it has no prompt
and if you press the capital p the
prompt will be shown
and most of the commands have to be
given a certain address
or a range of lines on which it has to
act so the command format would take the
starting address ending address followed
by the command and then parameters for
that command to act on
and to locate uh the cursor on any
particular line of the
file you could use the line number
itself like for example if you press 2
it means that you are in the second line
of the
text file if you press dot it means that
you are referring to the current line
that the cursor is a dollar would refer
to the last line
a percentage sign would refer to all the
lines so that any action that you are
doing will be applicable to all the
lines
plus and minus are used for the line
that is after the cursor or before the
cursor respectively
comma is also going to refer to the
entire buffer that is the whole of the
text file
and the semicolon is used to refer from
the current position in the text file
until the end of the text file
and then a regular expression given with
the two forward slashes can also be used
to refer to a location where that
particular regular expression has been
matched
and then there are a bunch of commands
for editing so
these single letters
do very powerful actions and we will
come to that when we come to the demo
you could also execute a command within
the add editor by using the bank
in front of the command that you want to
do so the command will be passed on to
the shell and it will be executed there
and the output will be shown on the
screen
and you can edit a particular file by
using the file name
you could read the contents of any file
into the buffer
of the file that you are editing
currently by using the r
command
and you could also read the output of
any command
into the buffer of the file that you are
executing by using the combination of r
and the
exclamation mark preceding the command
you could say whatever you have done to
the file by using the w command and then
once you have saved you can come out of
it using the queue command so ed editor
that way is fairly comprehensive when it
comes to a simple code editing that is
required but it is quite painful because
you don't get to see the whole file and
you also cannot move around the file
visually so it is not a visual editor
it's a line by line editor
so let us go ahead and explore some of
those features using demo let us look at
the illustration of ed as an editor for
line editing it's only to learn how
these shortcuts for the various actions
are coming which will be also repeated
in the va editor
we need a file to play around so we do
not want to touch important files in our
home directory so we will create a test
file that we could edit so i would use
the output of echo command along with
some line number indicators for us to
understand which line we are talking
about so the very first line would be
hello world and i would like to cop
write this to test dot text
and in the second line i would like to
append it
so you have got the second line here and
there i would write it as
welcome to
line
editor
and then the third line i would
write something else
ed is
perhaps the oldest
editor out there
and the fourth line i will have
end of
file okay so
look at the file and you can see that
there are four lines
now
now we would like to edit this file to
make some changes so that is where we
are going to have the add editor coming
up so to know more about the end editor
so you can press man add and you see
that there is some manual page that is
available for the editor and it doesn't
give you much about the commands etc so
that you could do from info so info ed
would open the info page for the ad
editor and you can go through the
overview then scroll through and you
will go to the second section on
introduction to line editing
and there are some illustrations of how
to go about
and then
you go on to the third session where the
format of various commands is
discussed and so on i come out of this
help now and we start using the ad
editor so
the way to invoke it is just add and
then the file name
and you see that when it opens
it's a little bit confusing because we
do not know what it is going to do so it
is actually showing you some number
which indicates how many bytes it has
read into the memory so let us go and
confirm that so we have to come out of
it by using q
and ls minus l test dot text and you
will see that 117 is a number of bytes
so it is reading the entire file into
the memory and then
it is going to then show you uh line by
line something that you can edit
so let us go ahead and start again
so there is no prompt at all and
sometimes it is useful to know that
there is a prompt for you to type
commands so press capital p and it would
use the prompt which is star you can
change it if you wish but for now we
will
go ahead with this
now there are some commands that we need
to
practice so let us say
we go to the first line
and it shows you what is in the first
line
and
if you want to go to the last line press
dollar
and you are in the last line
you could actually put a comma and a
small p to know
what are the contents of the entire
buffer so all the four lines are shown
you could also give a range so you can
say 2 2
3 then p
so the second to third line are getting
printed so you can see that the display
is actually scrolling
and the star is actually telling you a
prompt that you would like to then add
some commands after that but
it's not showing you the file in a
visual manner so there is a whole idea
of a line by line
editing concept using the line editor
add
can we then also look at which line we
will be if you were to search for a
pattern so let us say
i search for
hello
and let us see it is there in the first
line
i search for oldest
and it is saying that you are in the
line three so it would search for the
pattern and bring you to the first
occurrence of that particular pattern
and we could also uh go to a specific
line and then when you press a plus it
will go to the next line when you press
minus it go to the previous line
so you can scroll up and down by looking
at one line at a time
you could also go from the specific line
to the end of the buffer like this so
let us say you are going from three
and from there if you want to go to the
end of it end of the buffer so you see
from the third line till the end of the
buffer which is third and fourth lines
are being displayed when you use a
semicolon followed by p for printing
okay now the percentage is also a short
form for the entire set of lines so i
want to see all of them so i am also
able to use the percentage so these are
all the various ways of locating
which line you are going to operate on
so
dot actually says which is the current
line right now so we are actually on the
fourth line
okay and now again we are back on the
first line so we can actually always see
where we are and therefore the command
that we are going to run
is going to be affected on that
particular line as i mentioned you could
also run some commands here so i put a
exclamation mark and then put date so
the command has been run and the display
is done but it doesn't affect your
buffer yet so you could see that the
four lines are still there so if i want
to read the output of the command into
the buffer and i want to specify where i
want to read it let me go to the fourth
line
and then here i want to say read
the output of the date command so it
comes into the
buffer at the bottom
and you can then ask it to show all the
lines so you can see that it's added at
the bottom of the file but it's not yet
written
and i can press w and then it writes the
file so now the file is saved
okay
and once you have saved if you wish you
can come out of the file so
queue will get you out of the editor so
i'm back to the prompt this prompt is
something you are already familiar this
is the prompt of the shell okay and let
us look at the
occupation of test dot text it is 156
bytes so it means it has grown
and sure enough it is because we have
added a line at the end of the file
so you can see that we actually
successfully were able to
scroll through the file and add
something at the bottom
so we can try out a few more features
now so
now we have got
five lines so i want to go to the last
line so i put a dollar so now i am in
the last line and i want to say that on
the current line do the action which is
deleting it so it has done that action
and to help myself i put capital p for
the prompt
and then i want to see the buffer you
see that the buffer has been reduced
it's only four lines now
and if i press w the file is saved
come out of it
and cat
test dot text and you see that the last
line has been deleted so which command
has deleted the last line it is this
command dot d that is in the current
position delete the line and what is the
current position dollar says that you
are going to the last line of the
file and therefore the
command together when you read it says
that you should delete the last line
now we can actually go ahead and insert
something in between also so
look at the lines so i want to go to the
first line and there i want to append
some text so if i want to append some
text i press a
and then when i enter it is now asking
for the text that i want to append so we
can say
appended this line after the first line
okay now once you are done you should
come out of this appending action so on
an empty line if you press dot and then
enter
then the ed editor will know that you
have finished giving the text and then
it will bring the prompt back to you
now i go and look at the contents of the
file and you can see that what i wrote
here
is then appended after the first line
because my position of the line is known
here as one so after that the appending
has taken place and now you can see that
the text has been appended up to the
first line okay now we could also do
editing of this line so
this editing can be using some
principles of regular expressions that
we have learnt so let me go to that line
that we are talking about so that's the
second line i want to change the case of
the first word so what i do is that
i search for
the word
and i replace it with something so the
second part that comes after the
forward slash would be the replacement
string so i would say replacement is by
using the capital a okay and i close the
path so now you can see that there are
two pairs of regular expressions that
are given the first one is for the
matching so
this part is for the matching part and
this is for the replacement okay and on
which line is it going to be active on
the line that you have just now
mentioned so we do that
and then let us say i want to print the
second line so you can see that the
second line has been modified the first
word has been edited so we successfully
edited one line
by identifying the line number and doing
some action now the editing is done
actually by regular expression
and replacement but not in a visual
sense so this is something very
different way of editing and this is how
people used to do in the distant past
so we could also do some more editing so
let us say
we go to the
third line
and we want to change something here so
substitute welcome and i want to have
all capitals
okay and i want to print that line and
see that i have changed that line now we
have done couple of changes so we go
ahead and write the buffer
and then quit
okay and i clean the screen
and cat test dot text and you see that
we have done the changes so we have
edited the file so that the second line
has a capital a and there is a line also
after the first line and the third line
has a capitalized word so we have
successfully
added some text and we have also changed
the
letters so we have been able to edit the
file but of course it's not very optimal
in terms of experience but in olden days
when you had a very slow speed of
computers so if you are able to change
one line at a time that is already good
enough for you to write a program
because those computers were very slow
compared to what we are using today
now let us look at a couple of more
features
so that we understand the commands so
the prompt and what file am i
working on the f command would show that
so this command is going to be there
also in va editor so f
shows the name of the file that is being
edited
and p would show
the contents of the current line so
right now we are at the end of the file
so the last line is being shown
and
a is for appending at the current line
so i am at the last line so i append
okay and i write something here so
this line is appended at the end of the
file
and then dot and enter so the line is
done
you can see all the lines now
so you could see that i have appended a
line at the bottom of the file
now you could also do some joining here
so i would go and try to join the last
line to the fourth
line four so i go to five line 4
and the syntax would be
i want to join 5 and 6 with a j
and then you can
look at the current line and you can see
that these last two lines have been
joined so line 4 end of file and then
without anything between that and the
next line
this line is appended at the end of the
file so you can see that the two lines
have been joined so 5 comma 6 j means
join the fifth and the 6th lines now you
could also move a particular line to a
particular position so right now where
are we so we can see that we are at this
line so we can say move
this line
to the
first position
okay and then let us go and see what
happened
so you can see that the last line has
come just below the first line so you
could actually now print the second line
and you see that it has come
and which means that i have successfully
been able to move the last line to that
now if i want to make this as a first
line so first let me check i am in the
line two so i can say move this line to
the zero position
and then i can ask it to
print all the lines and you can see that
that particular line i'm working on line
4 end of file etc is now at the first
position so m0 would mean go to the very
beginning of the file m1 means put it
after the first line and so on so you
can actually give a number after m to
say to which line you want to move
the current line and that way you can
move the lines also up and down
okay and whatever we have done we don't
want that change so i want to undo so i
press u and press and enter and you can
see again all the lines and see that the
change i have made is reverted back so
you can see that here
the line one and then line four are one
after another then when i moved then i
have got
the line four and line one are like this
and then after i did undo then you can
see that they are back to the original
form so you can also do some
reversal of the actions that you have
taken and at any time you want to write
the file to the
disk and then you can come out
and
cat
to see that whatever changes you have
done have been affected to the file this
is how the ed editor is actually going
to help the people to go around changing
the
text now we will just illustrate one
more feature of the
add editor where the regular expression
power can be illustrated
so
look at all the lines so let us say i
would like to move all the lines a bit
side by putting something in the front
so
what i would do is i should say
the entire range i want to apply so
percentage will say that all the lines
are the address range and i want to
search for something that is basically
any character that can be matched so now
you see that we have grouped
dot star which means that all the
characters that can be matched are
grouped like that
and i want to replace them by writing
something in front and what do i want to
write in front i would say
prefix
and then a space and then backslash one
backslash one means whatever we have
grouped just now is going to be printed
in that position so essentially what we
are expecting is every line will be now
prefixed with the word prefix and space
okay and i press a forward slash to
complete the replacement expression and
then enter so now this action has been
taken place on all the lines and i can
now print all the lines to see what
happened so prefix word has come in
front of all the lines so you can see
that the regular expressions that we
have learnt in the previous class and
also the back substitution can also be
used for editing action straight away
and it will apply to all the lines or
any specific line so let us say i want
to reverse some of it and make it
applicable only for specific lines so
that i would do let us say from the
third to fifth lines i want to
substitute
prefix word with a smaller version
and now you can see that
the
text has been modified so from the third
onwards to fifth so third fourth fifth
lines have changed the first word where
with a regular expression i am
substituting capital prefix with a small
prefix so you can see that we are
actually using the regular expressions
and replacements to change one word at a
time ah in a given line and we can move
the lines up and down we can add a line
we can delete a line
and
we can also append something
at the bottom of the file and we can
also put some things in front of the
line or at the end of the line
using the regular expressions and
therefore we are able to edit the lines
so this is a very powerful feature of
the edit editor and it is pretty good
for us for a daily live editing of
source code but today we have a much
more powerful and visual experience with
the vi editor so ed editor that way is
not so popular today but it continues to
be there in the system packaged so that
you can always try it out if you are
interested in
some
historically
useful
editors that people have used in the
yesteryears
so let me write the buffer and queue
okay and cat what did we do the testing
you can see that we have edited the file
significantly all using the line editor
called ed
here is a summary of
commands that we have explored in the
demonstration for both the editor's ed
as well as x
and
each of these commands is a one letter
command
and these letters are the same in va
editor also
so
it would be good to also associate these
one letter commands with their meaning
and i have highlighted them in blue
color
to hint that one can actually try to
remember these already